---
title: 1.2 - LDAP in a few words
navPrev: 1.1-java-and-ldap.html
navPrevText: 1.1 - Java and LDAP
navUp: 1-introduction.html
navUpText: 1 - Introduction
navNext: 1.3-apache-ldap-api-rational.html
navNextText: 1.3 - The Apache LDAP API rationale
---

# 1.2 - LDAP in a few words

**LDAP** is not a new technlology. It has been around since the 90's to mitigate complexities inherent in **X.500** usage. Its name refers to **L**ightweight **D**irectory **A**ccess **P**rotocol. Soon after the first standard was issued, the first full *LDAP* server was created and X.500 became obsolete.

We'll use the term **LDAP** to represent the protocol and **LDAP server** to represent the server that implements it.

## Features
The **LDAP** protocol provides access to entries stored in a **LDAP Server's** database. It provides the mechanism for fast searching and retrieval of entries. Its data structures are hierarchical, and uses a schema to manage the definition of data formats allowed across those entries.

An **LDAP** client must first connect to a server and disconnect when finished. Some operations may be performed on the data itself, e.g. searches, modifications and deletions, along with a few others.

**LDAP** servers are extensible, but they all use a common protocol providing access to the data in a way that isn't tied to a particular vendor's implementation.

## Characteristics
**LDAP** servers are fast for retrievals, having been designed specifically for this purpose. But modifications can be costly. These characteristics must be understood when writing applications that use an **LDAP** server for data storage.

Each entry is associated with a location within its corresponding **D**irectory **I**nformation **T**ree, and we use what is known as a **D**istinguished **N**ame (or **Dn**) to describe this address. The base entry is known as the suffix.  The suffix along with all entries beneath it are collectively known as the **DIT**.

## Programming 

**LDAP** is a part of the **IT** landscape and so it's necessary to learn how to deal with it. **LDAP** servers are used to manage authentications, authorizations, demographic information about users and more. It's very likely that you will have to write some code to access data with **LDAP** at some point, and existing **API**s aren't quite up to the task. This **LDAP API** has been designed to simplify usage and ensure proper interaction with the server.

## Going further

This was a short introduction, there's more literature about **LDAP** on the web : [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LDAP) provides a good starting point.
