---
title: 1.3 - The Apache LDAP API rational
navPrev: 1.2-ldap-in-a-few-words.html
navPrevText: 1.2 - LDAP in a few words
navUp: 1-introduction.html
navUpText: 1 - Introduction
navNext: 1.4-preparation-to-code.html
navNextText: 1.4 - Preparation to code
---

# 1.3 - The Apache LDAP API rationale

When contemplating the creation of a new Java API for **LDAP**, we needed to first consider whether it was really necessary, because there were already a number of libraries that did it. For example:

* **JNDI** : the default **JDK** **API**
* **Netscape** (a.k.a Mozilla) [LdapSdk](https://www-archive.mozilla.org/directory/javasdk.html)
* **OpenLDAP** [JLdap](https://www.openldap.org/jldap/)

So why is the development of our new *LDAP API* for Java NOT the **[NIH](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Not_Invented_Here)** syndrome?

There are a number of reasons for which we'll discuss throughout this chapter.

## History
The Apache Directory Server project was started using the **JNDI** library, but many of its **LDAP** structures had to be developed in-house because the **JNDI** library was ineffective for interacting with an **LDAP** server.  It wasn't convenient for us to use JNDI which means it won't be for you either.  Eventually, all of the necessary **LDAP** data structures (_Attribute_, _Entry_, _DN_, ...) were re-implemented by us.

At some point we had to communicate with other **LDAP** servers without using the **JNDI** library, so we developed our own _LdapConnection_ class. This was the first step toward a full **Java API** specifically designed for LDAP usage on the Java platform.

Strangely, after starting this effort (back in 2007), some people from **Sun** (Microsystems), who was working on the **OpenDS** project, contacted us to ask if we'd be interested in helping them create the next version of **JNDI**. ([Resurrecting The Java LDAP Centric API](https://blogs.oracle.com/treydrake/entry/resurrecting_the_java_ldap_centric)). Sadly this effort stalled, as the need for *JNDI2* was no longer a priority for **Sun**. Nevertheless we decided to continue our work but the the pace was slow.

The work renewed after the **OpenDS** project team's presentation at **LdapCon** in 2009 ([Towards a common LDAP API for the Java Platform](http://www.symas.com/ldapcon2009/papers/poitou1.shtml)). The story repeated itself once again after **Oracle** bought **Sun** in 2010, and its project team disbanded.

Despite these fits and starts, a consensus was reached about the need for a new LDAP **API** and what it should be capable of doing. We agreed on these key features for the new **LDAP API**:

* A complete coverage of the **LDAP** protocol
* A schema aware **API**
* An easy to use **API**
* An **API** taking advantage of the new **Java** construction (generics, ellipsis, NIO)

## Result
Our newly defined **API** fulfills all of these aspects. 

We needed to ensure our **LDAP API** was made available to the masses. Because the Apache Software Foundation values community over code, this code was the result of collaboration, and our users are a necessary part of this process.  Every time a user finds and reports a bug we have the opportunity to provide a better version of this **API**.

In the end, we're proud to deliver a powerful new Java LDAP API, that is available for everyone to use, including our sub-projects like Apache Directory Server, Apache Directory Studio and most recently -- Apache Fortress. 
