---
title: 2.1 - Connection and disconnection
navPrev: 2-basic-ldap-api-usage.html
navPrevText: 2 - Basic LDAP API usage
navUp: 2-basic-ldap-api-usage.html
navUpText: 2 - Basic LDAP API usage
navNext: 2.2-binding-unbinding.html
navNextText: 2.2 - Binding and unbinding
---

# 2.1 - Connection and disconnection

The **LDAP** is a protocol requires users to be connected, and likely identified (authenticated), before sending requests to the server. This connection can potentially be maintained forever. What makes the **LDAP** protocol different from, say, the **HTTP** protocol is that the connections are issued explicitly. Here we'll see how it's done.

## Opening a connection

We can open a secure or a standard connection. 

### Standard connection

We can first establish a standard connection, where the data is sent and received in clear text (encoded in ASN.1 BER, but not encrypted). This example shows how it's done:

```Java
    LdapConnection connection = new LdapNetworkConnection( "localhost", 389 );
```

Here we created an unsafe connection locally using the 389 port. Which is quite simple to do but not safe because data is not encrypted.

### Secure connection

Although the **LDAPS** (**LDAP** over **SSL**) is now considered as deprecated, many people still use it. The big advantage of not using **LDAPS** is that you don't need two different listening ports (one for **LDAP** -389- and another one for **LDAPS** -636- ).

The only difference with the previous example is that we tell the connection to use **SSL**, by passing **_true_** as a third parameter (incidentally, passing **_false_** sets an unsafe connection).

Here is an example

```Java
    LdapConnection connection = new LdapNetworkConnection( "localhost", 636, true );
```

## Maintaining the connection opened

We keep the connection open for a limited period of time, defaulting to 30 seconds. This might be not long enough, so one can change this delay by calling the _setTimeOut()_ method :

```Java
    LdapConnection connection = new LdapNetworkConnection( "localhost", 389 );
    connection.setTimeOut( 0 );
    ...
    connection.close();
```

>**Note:** Setting a value equal or below 0 will keep the connection open forever (assuming the connection is not explicitly closed by the client).

## Closing the connection

Once the connection is no longer needed (remember that holding a connection keeps the session open on the server and a socket is held open between the client and the server), then you must close it. This is done by calling the _close()_ method :

```Java
    LdapConnection connection = new LdapNetworkConnection( "localhost", 389 );
    ...
    connection.close();
```

## Using a pool of connections

Creating a connection is expensive. If that connection will be reused, or if your application needs multiple connections, you may want to consider using a _connection pool_.

This process is slightly more complex given that there are many parameters that can be used to tune the pool.  Here is an example:

```Java
    LdapConnectionConfig config = new LdapConnectionConfig();
    config.setLdapHost( hostname );
    config.setLdapPort( port );
    config.setName( adminDn );
    config.setCredentials( adminPassword );

    DefaultLdapConnectionFactory factory = new DefaultLdapConnectionFactory( config );
    factory.setTimeOut( connectionTimeout );

    // optional, values below are defaults
    GenericObjectPool.Config poolConfig = new GenericObjectPool.Config();
    poolConfig.lifo = true;
    poolConfig.maxActive = 8;
    poolConfig.maxIdle = 8;
    poolConfig.maxWait = -1L;
    poolConfig.minEvictableIdleTimeMillis = 1000L * 60L * 30L;
    poolConfig.minIdle = 0;
    poolConfig.numTestsPerEvictionRun = 3;
    poolConfig.softMinEvictableIdleTimeMillis = -1L;
    poolConfig.testOnBorrow = false;
    poolConfig.testOnReturn = false;
    poolConfig.testWhileIdle = false;
    poolConfig.timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis = -1L;
    poolConfig.whenExhaustedAction = GenericObjectPool.WHEN_EXHAUSTED_BLOCK;

    LdapConnectionPool pool = new LdapConnectionPool(
        new DefaultPoolableLdapConnectionFactory( factory ), poolConfig ) );
```

This creates a pool of connections that are pre-authenticated.  If you don't setName and setCredentials, then the pool will contain unauthenticated connections.

The _DefaultPoolableLdapConnectionFactory_ is sufficient for many cases.  However some operations result in modifications to the connection itself.  For example, when the pool is created, a bind operation will occur with the credentials supplied as part of the config.  If you borrow a connection and perform a bind yourself, that would result in the connection being re-bound as a different user.  The next time that connection gets borrowed, things are likely to break.  If you perform any operation that results in a modification of the connection, you should instead use _ValidatingPoolableLdapConnectionFactory_:

```Java
    ...
    LdapConnectionPool pool = new LdapConnectionPool(
        new ValidatingPoolableLdapConnectionFactory( factory ), poolConfig ) );
    ...
```

A connection pool using this factory will unbind and rebind any connection that was modified while it was borrowed (_see the javadoc for more detail_).  This will be slower due to the additional operations, but not significantly.
