---
title: 6.3 - Attribute
navPrev: 6.2-administrative-role.html
navPrevText: 6.2 - AdministrativeRole
navUp: 6-ldap-data-structures.html
navUpText: 6 - LDAP data structures
navNext: 6.4-attribute-type.html
navNextText: 6.4 - AttributeType
---

# 6.3 - Attribute

The _Attribute_ class is used to store values associated with an _AttributeType_. An _Entry_ can contain many _Attribute{s_, but only one of them is mandatory: the _ObjectClass_  _Attribute_.

An _Attribute_ can store zero, one or N values, accordingly to its associated _AttributeType_, which may allow null values, and which also can forbid muli-values.

The _Attribute_ has a internal _AttributeType_ which is usually defined using its name. This name is case insensitive, and we can also use the _AttributeType_ _OID_.

## Creating an Attribute

Creating an _Attribute_ is not complex. Again, we split the API into two categories:

* the schema agnostic _Attributes_
* the schema aware _Attributes_

### Schema agnostic Attribute

If we don't inject a _SchemaManager_ into the constructor, then the _Attribute_ will have no way to control whether its _AttributeType_ exists, nor that its _Values_ are valid.

Let's see how we can create _Attributes_. Basically, all what that needed is to provide the _AttributeType_ as a String, and some _Values_ (that are optional). Here is an example:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " CN " );
```

Here, we created an empty _Attribute_. Note that _cn_ does not allow empty values, but it's not enforced. Also note that the _AttributeType_ is lowercase and trimmed internally.

Let's see another example, with some values:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " CN ", "test", "Test", " test ", "test" );
```

Here, we create an _Attribute_ with 3 values. We can see that the values are not duplicated (the _"test"_ value is only inserted once) and that values are case sensitive (the _"test"_ and _"Test"_ values are both stored in the _Attribute_). The values aren't trimmed either, so we can have a _"test"_ and a _" test "_ values stored.

This is why having a schema aware _Attribute_ is really handy.

It's possible to store binary values into an _Attribute_ too:

```Java
    byte[] bytes1 = new byte[]{0x01, 0x02};
    byte[] bytes2 = new byte[]{0x03, 0x04};
    byte[] bytes3 = new byte[]{0x01, 0x02};

    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " JpegPhoto ", bytes1, bytes2, bytes3 );
```

Same here: values are not duplicated.

Note that it's not allowed to store a mix of binary and String values into an _Attribute_:

```Java
    byte[] bytes1 = new byte[]{0x01, 0x02};

    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " JpegPhoto ", "test", bytes1 ); // Does not compile
```

### Schema aware Attribute

We can inject a _SchemaManager_ into the _Attribute_ which will allow more control over the values stored within the _Attribute_. Let's see an example of how this works:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn );
```

Here, we created an _Attribute_ with a specific _AttributeType_ ('atCn') and no value. Let's create a new _Attribute_ with some values:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "test", "Test", "  test  " );
```

The important point here is that the values are all considered equal. The _contains_ method also uses the schema to compare its given value with the interned values. Here, with the _cn_ _AttributeType_, the value is not case sensitive, so _"TEST"_ is considered as an existing value, even if we injected _"test"_.

## Modifying an Attribute

Now that we created an _Attribute_ we would like to add or remove values from it. This is quite easy. We have a set of methods to add or remove values, and depending on whether the _Attribute_ is schema aware or not, the added values will be checked. 

### Adding some value

Here is an example of a value addition into a schema agnostic _Attribute_, then the same operation into a schema aware _Attribute_:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " CN " );
    Attribute attributeSA = new DefaultAttribute( atCn );
    
    // Add two values
    attribute.add( "test1", "" );
    
    // add two values
    attributeSA.add( "test1", "" );
```

We can see that the schema aware _Attribute_ just contains only one value after the operation, as the _cn_ attribute type does not allow empty strings.

There is one important point to understand -- whenever a schema agnostic _Attribute_ is created, it knows nothing about the type of values it will store. Once the first value is added, the _Attribute_ will be typed accordingly to the first value added. Then we can no longer add values that are not of the same type. 

If the _Attribute_ is schema aware, it's quite obvious. You won't be able to add a binary value into a Human Readable _Attribute_.
The following test shows that:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " CN " );
    Attribute attributeSA = new DefaultAttribute( atCn );
    
    byte[] bytes = new byte[]{0x01, 0x02};
    
    // Add two values
    attribute.add( "test1" );
    attribute.add( bytes );

    // add two values
    attributeSA.add( "test1" );
    attributeSA.add( bytes );
```

### Removing some values

Removing a value from an _Attribute_ is a trivial operation. Of course, if the _Attribute_ is schema aware, we will use the _AttributeType_ comparator to check if the value is present in the _Attribute_ or not (the comparator is associated with the attribute equality _MatchingRule_.

Here is an example:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( " CN " );
    
    // Add three values
    attribute.add( "test1", "test2", "test3" );
    
    // Remove 2 of them
    attribute.remove( "test2", "test3" );
    
    // Try to remove the last one, using wrong casing
    attribute.remove( "Test1" );
```

And the same example, on a schema aware _Attribute_. It demonstrates how convenient it is to manipulate such schema aware objects:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn );
    
    // Add three values
    attribute.add( "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
    
    // Remove 2 of them
    attribute.remove( "TEST 2", "test   3" );
    
    // Try to remove the last one, using wrong casing
    attribute.remove( "Test 1" );
```

## Attribute data access methods

We have a set of methods used to get some information about the _Attribute_. They are described in this chapter.

### contains()

Checks if the given values are present in the _Attribute_. We can check for more than one value, but in this case, the method returns _true_ only if **all** the values are present.

If the _Attribute_ is schema aware, then the check uses the _AttributeType_ to compare the given values with the interned values, otherwise, we do a strict comparison.

Here is an example:

```Java
    Attribute attribute1 = new DefaultAttribute( atCn );
    
    // Add three values
    attribute1.add( "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
    
    Attribute attribute2 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn" );
    
    // Add three values
    attribute2.add( "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
```

### get()

Returns the first value from the _Attribute_. The first value is the one which has been added first. Note that it returns a _Value_ instance.

### getAttributeType()

Returns the internal _AttributeType_, if the _Attribute_ is schema aware.

### getBytes()

Returns the first value as a _byte[]_, if the _Attribute_ is not human readable. The user **must** know that the _Attribute_ contains binary values, otherwise they will get an _LdapInvalidAttributeValueException_.

### getString()

Returns the first value as a _String_, if the _Attribute_ is  human readable. The user **must** know that the _Attribute_ contains String values, otherwise they will get an _LdapInvalidAttributeValueException_.

### getId()

Returns the _AttributeType_ normalized ID. If the _Attribute_ is schema agnostic, it will be the trimmed and lower cased user provided ID, otherwise it will be the _AttributeType_ OID (not the name).

### getUpId()

Returns the attribute type user provided ID, if the user provided one. Typically, if the _Attribute_ is schema aware, the user might not provide an ID, and in this case, this method will return the _AttributeType_ name, or default to the OID.

### isHumanReadable()

Tells if the _Attribute_ contains String values or binary values. 

## Miscellaneous methods

We also have a set of miscellaneous methods, which are not frequently used. Here they are:

### apply( AttributeType )
Inject an _AttributeType_ into the _Attribute_, making it schema aware. It will check that the associated values are valid at the same time, and normalize the values.

Here is an example of the impact of such a method on an existing attribute :

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( "CN", "  A    test" );
    
    attribute.apply( atCn );
```

It shows that we can now check that a value is not literately compared, the modified attribute uses the Equality _MatchingRule_ to compare the values.

Here is another example, where we try to apply an attribute type to some attribute containing an invalid value : it generates an exception, as expected.

```Java
    byte[] bytes = new byte[]{0x01, 0x02};
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( "CN", bytes );
    
    attribute.apply( atCn );
```

### clear()

This method removes all the values from the attribute. The attribute type is not removed. Here is an example demonstrating how it works:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "test1", "test2" );
    
    attribute.clear();
```

### clone()

This method creates a new instance of an existing attribute. All of the attribute values along with its attribute type are cloned and distinct from the original attribute.

### equals( Object )

Compares two _Attributes_. All of its values are compared and should be present in both attributes. If you compare a schema aware _Attribute_ with a schema agnostic _Attribute_, they won't be equal.

Here is a snippet of code demonstrating the _equals_ method:

```Java
    Attribute attribute1 = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
    Attribute attribute2 = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "Test   3", "Test 2  ", "Test 1" );
    Attribute attribute3 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn", "test 1", "test 3", "test 2" );
    Attribute attribute4 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn", "test 1", "test 3", "test 2" );
    
    // Should be true
    boolean equals = attribute1.equals( attribute2 );
    equals = attribute3.equals( attribute4 );

    // Should be false
    equals = attribute1.equals( attribute3 );
    equals = attribute1.equals( attribute4 );
    equals = attribute2.equals( attribute4 );

    // Now, inject an AttrbuteType in one attribute    
    attribute4.apply( atCn );

    // The previously not equals attributes are now equal :
    equals = attribute1.equals( attribute4 );
    equals = attribute2.equals( attribute4 );
```

### isInstanceOf( AttributeType )

Tells if an _Attribute_ derives from a given _AttributeType_. It can be useful if you have a schema aware _Attribute_ and want to know if its attribute type inherits from another one. Here is an example of usage:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
    
    // Should be true
    boolean value = attribute.isInstanceOf( atCn );
```

### isValid( AttributeType )

Checks if the _Attribute_ contains valid data. It's useful if one wants to apply an _AttributeType_ to the _Attribute_, as the _isValid_ method will tell if it's possible to do so without throwing an exception.

Here is some code that test the different use cases:

```Java
    Attribute attribute1 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn", "\uFFFDtest" );
    
    // Should be false
    boolean isValid = attribute1.isValid( atCn ) );
    
    Attribute attribute2 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn" );

    // Should be false, 'cn' requires a value
    isValid = attribute2.isValid( atCn );
    
    Attribute attribute3 = new DefaultAttribute( "cn", "test" );

    // Should be true
    value = attribute3.isValid( atCn );
    
    Attribute attribute4 = new DefaultAttribute( "dc", "test", "test2" );

    // Should be false, we can't put more than one value in 'dc'
    value = attribute4.isValid( atDc );
```

### iterator()

A convenient way to iterate over all of the _Attribute_ values. It enables the _for ( Value<?> value : attribute )_ construct. Here is an example using the iterator:

```Java
    Attribute attribute = new DefaultAttribute( atCn, "test 1", "test 2", "test 3" );
    
    for ( Value<?> value : attribute )
    {
        System.out.println( "Value : " + value );
    }
```

This code produces the following output:

```Text
    Value : test 1
    Value : test 2
    Value : test 3
```

### setUpId()

Sets the user provided identifier for the attribute type. If the _Attribute_ is schema agnostic, then the normalized ID will be the given user provided ID lower cased and trimmed. If it's schema aware, it will be used instead of the _AttributeType_ ID.

### size()
Returns the number of values stored in this _Attribute_
