---
title: 1.1.5 - Database
navPrev: 1.1.4-kdc.html
navPrevText: 1.1.4 - KDC (Key Distribution Center)
navUp: 1.1-introduction.html
navUpText: 1.1 - Introduction
navNext: 1.1.6-as.html
navNextText: 1.1.6 - AS (Authentication Server)
---

# 1.1.5 - Database

This is the place where all the private keys are stored. It is very common to store all the keys in an LDAP server, even more natural when the **Kerberos** server is a part of an existing LDAP server, like **Apache Directory Server* !

When **Apache Directory Server** was started, it was also thought as a repository for **Kerberos** keys, so we just had to develop the logic to manage those keys, and the Kerberos protocol. 

In other words, you have everything embedded in a single server :
* The LDAP server to store the keys and other related information
* The Kerberos protocol
* The Authentication Server
* The Ticket Granting Server

We will focus on the database in this section.

## Storage

We store everthing related to users, hosts and services in the LDAP base, as entries. In order to be able to retrieve them, we have to store them in a known place in the hierarchy. This position is fknown by the kerberos server using the 
**Search Base DN** parameter.

Everytime the **Kerberos** server received a request for a ticket from a principal, it will do a LDAP search starting from the **Search Base DN**, looking for any entry matching the filter _'(krb5PrincipalName=<the principal>)'_. This entry should contain the Kerberos keys that will be used to generate the ticket.

One more requirement : the key as a version which allows a user to keep going with a previous key when he just changed its password (an operation that will change the Kerberos keys). 

So for an LDAP entry to be seen as a valid Kerberos entry, it has to contain a _Krb5PrincipalName_, a _Krb5Key_ and one more attribute, the _Krb5KeyVersionNumber_.


## Structure

There is an existing **LDAP** schema to manage the keys and other information, named **krb5kdc**. It contains 3 ObjectClasses and 15 AttributeTypes.

All the ObjectClasses are auxilliary.

### krb5Principal

This ObjectClass is used to store a Principal. It contains one mandatory AttributeType, _krb5PrincipalName_, and two optionnal (_cn_ and _krb5PrincipalRealm_)

### krb5Realm

This ObjectClass describes a Kerberos Realm. It just contains the Realm's name (_krb5RealName_ AttributeType).

## krb5kdcEntry

This ObjectClass is used to store all the information needed to manage a Kerberos user or service. It has one mandatory AttributeType, _krb5KeyVersioNumber_, which is set to 0 for newly crated users or services, and incremented after each modification done on the password (which leads to the generation of new keys).

Here is a list of optional AttributeTypes the entry can have :

| AttributeType | Description |
|---|---|
| krb5ValidStart | The date at which the keys are valid |
| krb5ValidEnd | The date at which the keys aren't valid any more |
| krb5PasswordEnd | The end of password validity |
| krb5MaxLife | The maximum duration |
| krb5MaxRenew | Th maximum number of renew |
| krb5KDCFlags | The KDC flags |
| krb5EncryptionType | The EncryptionTypes |
| krb5Key | The generated keys |
| krb5AccountDisabled | The account has been disabled |
| krb5AccountLockedOut | The account has been locked out |
| krb5AccountExpirationTime | The account expiration time |

## Sample

Here is a sample entry, which has the _Krb5KdcEntry_ and  _Krb5Principal_ ObjectClasses set :


    
    dn: uid=hnelson,ou=users,dc=example,dc=com
    objectClass: inetOrgPerson
    objectClass: organizationalPerson
    objectClass: person
    objectClass: krb5principal
    objectClass: krb5kdcentry
    objectClass: top
    uid: hnelson
    userPassword: secret
    krb5PrincipalName: hnelson@EXAMPLE.COM
    krb5KeyVersionNumber: 0
    cn: Horatio Nelson
    sn: Nelson
    krb5Key: '0x30 0x29 0xA0 0x03 0x02 0x01 0x12 0xA1 0x22 0x04 0x20 0x3D 0x33 0x31 0x8F 0xBE ...'
    krb5Key: '0x30 0x21 0xA0 0x03 0x02 0x01 0x10 0xA1 0x1A 0x04 0x18 0x57 0x07 0xCE 0x29 0x52 ...'
    krb5Key: '0x30 0x19 0xA0 0x03 0x02 0x01 0x17 0xA1 0x12 0x04 0x10 0x87 0x8D 0x80 0x14 0x60 ...'
    krb5Key: '0x30 0x11 0xA0 0x03 0x02 0x01 0x03 0xA1 0x0A 0x04 0x08 0xF4 0xA7 0x13 0x64 0x8A ...'
    krb5Key: '0x30 0x19 0xA0 0x03 0x02 0x01 0x11 0xA1 0x12 0x04 0x10 0xAD 0x21 0x4B 0x38 0xB6 ...'



