---
title: 4.1 - Authenticate with kinit on Linux
navPrev: 4-using-kerberos
navPrevText: 4 - Using Kerberos
navUp: 4-using-kerberos.html
navUpText: 4 - Using Kerberos
navNext: 4.2-authenticate-studio.html
navNextText: 4.2 - Authenticate with Studio
---

# 4.1 - Authenticate with kinit on Linux

##Setup

You first have to make sure **kinit** is installed.

You can check that by typing **kinit** in a console :

    
    $ kinit --version
    kinit (Heimdal 1.4.1apple1)
    Copyright 1995-2010 Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan
    Send bug-reports to heimdal-bugs@h5l.org
    $

Then, you have to configure the **krb5.conf** file (it can be found in **/etc/krb5.conf**, if not just add it).


A minimal /etc/krb5.conf file looks as follows (make sure the port and host name matches!):

    
    [libdefaults]
        default_realm = EXAMPLE.COM

    [realms]
        EXAMPLE.COM = {
                kdc = example.net:60088
        }

    [domain_realm]
        .example.com = EXAMPLE.COM
        example.com = EXAMPLE.COM
      

Check that the **Kerberos** sevrer is started, then try to get a ticket from a user that exists in the base (here, we use hnelson, which is a user we created for test purposes. His password is 'secret')

    
    $ kinit hnelson@EXAMPLE.COM
    Password for hnelson@EXAMPLE.COM:
    $

You should not get any error. If you've get some, see later in this chapter.

Now, let's check that we have correctly obtained a ticket. We will use the **klist** tool for that :

    
    $ klist -v
    Credentials cache: API:501:9
            Principal: hnelson@EXAMPLE.COM
        Cache version: 0

    Server: krbtgt/EXAMPLE.COM@EXAMPLE.COM
    Client: hnelson@EXAMPLE.COM
    Ticket etype: aes128-cts-hmac-sha1-96
    Ticket length: 256
    Auth time:  Feb 11 16:11:36 2013
    End time:   Feb 12 02:11:22 2013
    Renew till: Feb 18 16:11:36 2013
    Ticket flags: pre-authent, initial, renewable, forwardable
    Addresses: addressless
    $

As we can see, we have obtained a ticket which will expire 6 hours after its creation, which can be renexed for 7 days, encrypted using AES-128 algorithm, ticket that can be used by the **TGS**.

All is good !     

## Troubleshooting

So it does not work...

There are many possible reason why you can't get a ticket.

### kinit: krb5_get_init_creds: unable to reach any KDC in realm EXAMPLE.COM

Such a error says that the server is not reachable. Check those points :

* Is the server started ?
* Is the EXAMPLE.COM domain declared in your DNS (or /etc/hosts file) ?
