---
title: 0.2 - Building Trunks
navPrev: 0.1-reporting-bugs.html
navPrevText: 0.1 - Reporting Bugs
navUp: 0-community.html
navUpText: 0 - Community
navNext: 0.3-contributing.html
navNextText: 0.3 - Contributing
---

# 0.2 - Building Trunks
This page give some information about the layout of *Apache DS 2.0* trunks, and try to explain how it is built.

{{% toc %}}

## Project Hierarchy

The server is a composition of many projects, which should be built in a given order, assuming you want to build the trunk. This order is enforced by a top level pom, so you don't need to take care of this at all. 

We will expose the projects hierarchy, just for information.

### Project project

We first have a meta-project, which contains mainly information about the maven plugins we use. This meta-project is used by all the real projects. This project has one single module : 

* project

### Checkstyle-Configuration project

This project is used to define the checkstyle configuration we use when we generate the reports.

It has one single module :

* checkstyle-configuration 

_Dependencies_ : project

## Junit-Addons project

This project is used to add concurrent tests in the server. It's a fork of [Mycila](ref needed).

It has one single module :

* junit-addons

_Dependencies_ : project

### Apache Directory LDAP API project (formerly known as "Shared")

This project contains all the common LDAP structures that are used by ApacheDS, Apache Studio and the Apache LDAP API. In fact, this is the Apache LDAP API (even if we do have slightly more than necessary for an LDAP API).

This project depends on 'project'.

Here is its hierarchy :

* api-parent
	* api-i18n
    * api-util
	* api-asn1-parent
	* api-asn1-api
	* api-asn1-ber
	* api-ldap-parent
	* api-ldap-model
	* api-ldap-codec-parent
	* api-ldap-codec-core
	* api-ldap-net-parent
	* api-ldap-net-mina
	* api-ldap-codec-standalone
	* api-dsml-parent
	* api-dsml-parser
	* api-ldap-extras-parent
	* api-ldap-extras-aci
	* api-ldap-schema-parent
	* api-ldap-schema-data
	* api-ldap-client-parent
	* api-ldap-client-api
	* api-dsml-engine
	* api-ldap-extras-codec-api
	* api-ldap-extras-codec
	* api-ldap-extras-util
	* api-ldap-extras-sp
	* api-ldap-extras-trigger
	* api-ldap-schema-converter
	* api-all
	* api-ldap-client-all
	* api-integ
	* apache-ldap-api

_Dependencies_ : project, junit-addons
	
	
### JDBM project

This project covers the JDBM code. It's a fork of the [JDBM 1.0 project](ref needed).

The current project hierarchy is the following :

* apacheds-jdbm-parent
	* apacheds-jdbm
	* apacheds-jdbm2

_Dependencies_ : project, junit-addons
	
### ApacheDS project
This project is the server itself. It depends on 'project', 'shared' and 'jdbm'.

The current project hierarchy is the following (as of 2.0.0-M9-SNAPSHOT) :
		
* apacheds-parent
	* apacheds-i18n
	* apacheds-core-constants
	* apacheds-core-api
	* apacheds-core-shared
	* apacheds-interceptors
	* apacheds-interceptors-admin
	* apacheds-interceptors-authn
	* apacheds-interceptors-authz
	* apacheds-interceptors-changelog
	* apacheds-interceptors-collective
	* apacheds-interceptors-event
	* apacheds-interceptors-exception
	* apacheds-interceptors-journal
	* apacheds-interceptors-normalization
	* apacheds-interceptors-operational
	* apacheds-interceptors-referral
	* apacheds-interceptors-schema
	* apacheds-interceptors-subtree
	* apacheds-interceptors-triggers
	* apacheds-core
	* apacheds-core-avl
	* apacheds-xdbm-partition
	* apacheds-ldif-partition
	* apacheds-jdbm-partition
	* apacheds-core-annotations
	* apacheds-core-jndi
	* apacheds-protocol-shared
	* apacheds-kerberos-codec
	* apacheds-interceptor-kerberos
	* apacheds-protocol-dhcp
	* apacheds-protocol-dns
	* apacheds-protocol-kerberos
	* apacheds-protocol-ldap
	* apacheds-protocol-ntp
	* apacheds-server-annotations
	* apacheds-server-config
	* apacheds-server-jndi
	* apacheds-server-replication
	* apacheds-test-framework
	* apacheds-xdbm-tools
	* apacheds-all
	* apacheds-interceptors-logger
	* apacheds-interceptors-hash
	* apacheds-core-integ
	* apacheds-server-integ
	* apacheds-http-directory-bridge
	* apacheds-http-integration
	* apacheds-service-builder
	* apacheds-kerberos-test
	* ldap-client-test
	* apacheds-service
	* apacheds-wrapper
	* apacheds-installers-maven-plugin
	* apacheds-installers

_Dependencies_ : project, junit-addons jdbm, shared,

## Prerequisites for building

You must have installed **Maven 3.0.4** and have a **JDK 5** (or a more recent one) installed on your computer. A working internet connection is also mandatory, unless you have all the needed dependences and plugins loaded locally.

<DIV class="note" markdown="1">
If the build hangs or you get an out of memory exception please increase the heap space:

* For Linux:

	MAVEN_OPTS="-Xmx256m" mvn clean install

* For Windows:

      SET MAVEN_OPTS="-Xmx256m"
      mvn clean install
</DIV>

### Maven

[Download](https://maven.apache.org/download.html) and install Maven 3.0.4.

Add a MAVEN_HOME environment variable and add MAVEN_HOME/bin to your system path:

On a Linux box you could add the following to the .bashrc file  (.bashrc is a file you'll find in your home directory)


	...
	export MAVEN_HOME=/opt/maven-3.0.4
	export PATH=$JAVA_HOME:$JAVA_HOME/bin:$MAVEN_HOME/bin:$PATH
	...

Windows users, use Control Panel -> System -> Advanced -> Environment Variables

### JDK 5

<DIV class="note" markdown="1">
There may be some issues with older JDK versions and Kerberos, therefore we recommend using a version >=1.5.0_09
</DIV>

Any newer version should also work.


## Getting the code

To download the sources from trunk, you must have installed a **Subversion** client.

With readonly access :

	svn co http://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/directory/apacheds/trunk-with-dependencies apacheds-trunk

With read/write access (for committers only) :

	svn co https://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/directory/apacheds/trunk-with-dependencies apacheds-trunk

## Building the trunks

You may either specify the profile at the command-line, each time you use 'mvn', or you may configure the profile to always be active.

To use a profile at the command-line:

	# mvn -Papache [options] [<goal(s)>] [<phase(s)>]


### Building the trunks

Now, we can compile the projects.

The command is simple :

	cd apacheds-trunk
	mvn clean install

A lot of plugins will be downloaded. If you are curious, you can then look at .m2/repository to see what has been downloaded on this step.
Building should finish with these lines:

	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	[INFO] BUILD SUCCESSFUL
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------
	[INFO] Total time: 8 minutes 30 seconds
	[INFO] Finished at: Mon Oct 30 23:32:41 CET 2006
	[INFO] Final Memory: 18M/32M
	[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------

<DIV class="info" markdown="1">
If you want to do really safe build, run the following commands in trunks:

	resources/superclean.sh
	mvn install -Dintegration
</DIV>

## Running the server without building installers

The server can be run without building any installers. This is helpful during development
(and also can be run for regular purpose as well)  

    cd apacheds-trunk/apacheds/service
    ./apacheds.sh

To start the server in remote debug mode pass -debug flag. The JDWP socket will be listening 
on port 8008.

## Building the installers

Building the installers is a two phase process :

	cd apacheds-trunk
	mvn -Pinstallers install

That's it, the jars will be find in target/images/apacheds-2.0.0-M?-SNAPSHOT-<XXXXXX>-setup.jar where XXXXXX is your local system and M? is the milestone release number for the 2.0 branch.

## Starting the server without installation

The directory apacheds-trunk/installers/apacheds-noarch contains a script for Linux (apacheds.sh) and one for Windows (apacheds.bat) which can be used for starting the server without the need to install it first (as non-root-user on Linux and non-Windows-service on Windows).

Linux:

	cd apacheds-trunk/installers/apacheds-noarch
	./apacheds.sh

## Eclipse

As Apache Studio is an Eclipse plugin/RCP application, we use extensively this IDE. Of course, you can use another IDE.

### Building eclipse files

To build the .project and .classpath files for eclipse, type the following commands :

	cd apacheds-trunk
	mvn eclipse:eclipse

### Maven settings

Don't forget to declare a classpath variable named M2_REPO, pointing to ~/.m2/repository, otherwise many links to existing jars will be broken.

You can declare new variables in Eclipse in _Windows -> Preferences..._ and selecting _Java -> Build Path -> Classpath Variables_

### Eclipse hints

Add an eclipse-apacheDS.sh file in your eclipse root directory, to allow eclipse to get more memory (e.g. 750MB)
You may also declare a specific workspace when launching eclipse. I have created a workspace-apacheDS directory in my HOME directory, where all the ApacheDS project is built when I use Eclipse.

	<eclipse_root>/eclipse -data $HOME/workspace-apacheDS -vm java -vmargs -Xmx750M

Launch eclipse :

	<eclipse_root>/eclipse-apacheDS.sh

### Coding standards

The coding standards including an eclipse code formatting profile is available [here](../coding-standards.html)

