---
title: 1.2 - Newtork Layer
navPrev: 1.1-architecture-overview.html
navPrevText: 1.1 - Architecture Overview
navUp: 1-architecture.html
navUpText: 1 - Architecture
navNext: 1.3-directory-service.html
navNextText: 1.3 - DirectoryService
---

# 1.2 - Network Layer

This layer is the part the user connects to when he wants to obtain some data from the server. This is not a mandatory part of the server : we don't need to use it when the server is embedded.

We offer more than just LDAP protocol, the server also include various protocols :

* Kerberos
* NTP
* DHCP
* DNS
* ChangePassword

Not all of them are implemented in the current version, but at least the Kerberos server is available. The other protocols have been developed as a proof of concept : as they are all depending upon a storage database, we have used the LDAP server as a storage.

It's perfectly possible to imagine more protocols being implemented in the near future...

## Server startup

This chapter title is a bit misleading. We don't start a server, we start a _DirectoryService_, then we start various servers on top of it.
The _DirectoryService_ is the part responsible for the management of data (retrieval, storage, etc). All the servers can access this storage if needed.

So when the _DirectoryService_ has been started and is operational, we can start the various servers, which will accept incoming requests from remote peers.

### Transports

We allow connection through the definition of _transports_. A _Transport_ is a **TCP** or an **UDP** socket capable of absorbing a request and to send a response. Depending on the type of server, we may declare one or more **TCP** _Transports_, or a **TCP** and a **UDP** _Transports_, or an **UDP** _Transport_ only.

### Ldap Server

The LDAP server needs one or two **TCP** _Transport_. We have the standard *LDAP* port (defaulting to *10389* for _ApacheDS_, but the well know port is usually 389), and one can also declare the *LDAPS* port (defaulting to *10636* for _ApacheDS_, but the well know port is usually 636). 

<DIV class="warning" markdown="1">
Note that *LDAPS* is considered as deprecated.
</DIV>

### Kerberos Server

The Kerberos Server uses one **TCP** _Transport_ (defaulting to *60088*, but the well know port is 88 ) and one **UDP** _transport (same value for both ports). The idea is that the communication starts on **TCP** and continues on **UDP**.

### ChangePassword Server

The ChangePassword Server uses one **TCP** _Transport_ and one **UDP** transport, too. The default value is *60464*, but the well known port is *464*.

### Http Server

We have a HttpServer running too, it's used for management. The declared ports are both **TCP** port, one is for HTTP and its default value is *8080*, the other one is for HTTPS and its default value is *8443*.

