---
title: 1.2 - DirectoryService
navPrev: 1.1-architecture-overview.html
navPrevText: 1.1 - Architecture Overview
navUp: 1-architecture.html
navUpText: 1 - Architecture
navNext: 1.2-network.html
navNextText: 1.2 Network
---

# 1.3 - DirectoryService

The _DirectoryService_ is the core of the server. This is where we process incoming requests and ask the backend for data. 

It has an entry point, the _OperationManager_, which is in charge of pushing the requests into the _Interceptors_ chain, and to protect the server against concurrent modifications.

Then the request is going through every _Interceptor_ being registered for this operation. When we have gone through all the _Interceptors_, we have reached the _PartitionNexus_, which is the connection with the backends.

We now just have to determinate which type of _Backend_ we should address, and this is done using the _Dn_. The request is then transmitted to the _Backend_, which returns the result.

The result bubbles up through the _Interceptors_ as we unfold the stack stack, up to the _OperationManager_ and to the caller.

## Environment

The _DirectoryService_ knows about its execution environment : it has a _schemaManager_ instance, it knows about the _Interceptors_ chain, it stores a map of all the pending requests (it's necessary as one may abandon some request), it holds the existing _Sessions_.

In other word, the _DirectoryService_ is not only the part of the server executing the logic, it also holds the current state of every clients.

## Initialization

Starting a _DirectoryService_ will require to create the following parts:

* The _SchemaManager_: it will create the directory on which the schema will be extracted, if it does not already exist. It will then load the schema in memory.
* The _Schema_ partition: it will create the in-memory LDIF partition containing a copy of the schema.
* The _Configuration_ partition: it will create a in-memory partition containing all the configuration (the configuration is LDAP-based). Once done, a in-memory representation of this configuration will be created to ease the initialization of the server.
* The _DnFactory_: it will create the *DN* cache, which size is based on all the partitions cache size configuration.
* A shutdown hook to stop the server
* The various interceptors
* All the user's partitions
* The _System_ partition
* The _ChangeLog_ system
* The partition _Nexus_ (which manages to the underlaying storage)

Once this is done, we will be able to start the *LdapServer*.

