---
title: 1.3 - DirectoryService
navPrev: 1.2-network.html
navPrevText: 1.2 - Network Layer
navUp: 1-architecture.html
navUpText: 1 - Architecture
navNext: 1.4-interceptors.html
navNextText: 1.4 - Interceptors
---

# 1.3 - DirectoryService

The _DirectoryService_ is the core of the server. This is where we process incoming requests and ask the backend for data. 

It has an entry point, the _OperationManager_, which is in charge of pushing the requests into the _Interceptors_ chain, and to protect the server against concurrent modifications.

Then the request is going through every _Interceptor_ being registered for this operation. When we have gone through all the _Interceptors_, we have reached the _PartitionNexus_, which is the connection with the backends.

We now just have to determinate which type of _Backend_ we should address, and this is done using the _Dn_. The request is then transmitted to the _Backend_, which returns the result.

The result bubbles up through the _Interceptors_ as we unfold the stack stack, up to the _OperationManager_ and to the caller.

## Environment

The _DirectoryService_ knows about its execution environment : it has a _schemaManager_ instance, it knows about the _Interceptors_ chain, it stores a map of all the pending requests (it's necessary as one may abandon some request), it holds the existing _Sessions_.

In other word, the _DirectoryService_ is not only the part of the server executing the logic, it also holds the current state of every clients.

