---
title: 4.1.2.2 - SASL CRAM-MD5 Authentication
navPrev: 4.1.2.1-sasl-plain-text-authn.html
navPrevText: 4.1.2.1 - SASL PLAIN text Authentication
navUp: 4.1.2-sasl-authn.html
navUpText: 4.1.2 - SASL Authentication
navNext: 4.1.2.3-sasl-digest-md5-authn.html
navNextText: 4.1.2.3 - SASL DIGEST-MD5 Authentication
---

# 4.1.2.2 - SASL CRAM-MD5 Authentication

The **CRAM-MD5** **SASL** mechanism is defined by [RFC 2195](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2195.txt).

We will have an exchange between the client, which will send an empty _Bind request_ (i.e., the username and credentials won't be sent the first time), and the server will return a challenge.

<DIV class="warning" markdown="1">
It's not recommended to use this mechanism.
</DIV>

## Usage

The client first send a _BindRequest_ with no credentials:

    
    MessageType : BIND_REQUEST
    Message ID : 1
        BindRequest
            Version : '3'
            Name : 'null'
            Sasl credentials
                Mechanism :'CRAM-MD5'
                Credentials : null

The server will return a _BindResponse_ with a SASL_BIND_IN_PROGRESS status :

    
    MessageType : BIND_RESPONSE
    Message ID : 1
        BindResponse
            Ldap Result
                Result code : (SASL_BIND_IN_PROGRESS) saslBindInProgress -- new
                Matched Dn : ''
                Diagnostic message : ''
            Server sasl credentials : '0x3C 0x2D 0x37 0x38 0x30 0x39 0x37 0x35 0x33 0x32 0x33 0x38 0x35 0x32 0x31 0x37 0x37 0x37 0x37 0x35 0x30 0x2E 0x31 0x33 0x36 0x35 0x34 0x31 0x31 0x39 0x32 0x37 0x30 0x33 0x30 0x40 0x6C 0x6F 0x63 0x61 0x6C 0x68 0x6F 0x73 0x74 0x3E '

and will accordingly send a new _BindRequest_ with the appropriate credentials which have been hashed with the server's provided challenge token :

    
    MessageType : BIND_REQUEST
    Message ID : 2
        BindRequest
            Version : '3'
            Name : 'null'
            Sasl credentials
                Mechanism :'CRAM-MD5'
                Credentials : (omitted-for-safety)

In any case, the full exchange aims at transferring the user's credential encrypted instead of passing it in clear text. Once the server receives the password, it will check it against the stored password which must be stored in clear text.

When the server receives a **SASL PLAIN** bind request, it will look for the first entry which **uid** is equal to the provided value, starting from the server **searchBaseDN** position in the DIT.

<DIV class="note" markdown="1">
ApacheDS expect the given name to be stored in the **UID** Attribute. This is not configurable in this version of the server.
</DIV>

<DIV class="warning" markdown="1">
The password must be stored in clear text on the server. This is a serious weakness...
</DIV>
