---
title: 2.2 - Kadmin
navPrev: 2.1-krbclient-apis.html
navPrevText: 2.1 - KrbClient APIs
navUp: 2-kerberos-library.html
navUpText: 2 - Kerberos library
navNext: 2.3-kdcserver.html
navNextText: 2.3 - KdcServer
---
	
# 2.2 - Kadmin
Server side admin facilities.



## Local mode
### Initiate a LocalKadminImpl
* Initiate a LocalKadminImpl with prepared KdcConfig and BackendConfig.
<pre>
LocalKadmin kadmin = new LocalKadminImpl(kdcConfig, backendConfig);
</pre>
* Initiate a LocalKadmin with confDir.
<pre>
LocalKadmin kadmin = new LocalKadminImpl(confDir);
</pre>
* Initiate a LocalKadmin with kdcSetting and backend.
<pre>
LocalKadmin kadmin = new LocalKadminImpl(kdcSetting, backend);
</pre>

### Principal operating
* Add principle with principal name.
<pre>
addPrincipal(principal);
</pre>
* Add principle with principal name and password.
<pre>
addPrincipal(principal, password);
</pre>
* Add principle with principal name and kOptions.
<pre>
addPrincipal(principal, kOptions);
</pre>
* Add principle with principal name, password and kOptions.
<pre>
addPrincipal(principal, password kOptions);
</pre>
* Delete principle with principal name.
<pre>
deletePrincipal(principal);
</pre>
* Modify principle with principal name and kOptions.
<pre>
modifyPrincipal(principal, kOptions);
</pre>
* Rename principle.
<pre>
renamePrincipal(oldPrincipalName, newPrincipalName);
</pre>
* Get principle with principal name.
<pre>
getPrincipal(principalName);
</pre>
* Get all the principles.
<pre>
getPrincipals();
</pre>
* Update password with principal name and new password.
<pre>
updatePassword(principal, newPassword);
</pre>
* Export all identity keys to the specified keytab file.
<pre>
exportKeyTab(keyTabFile);
</pre>


